Aotearoa, kaitiakitanga, mana whenua.
Thank you.
you
and Michael Kilkalli joining us. Karen, we have 10 minutes with you this morning.
That includes time for questions.
Pass it over to you now.
Thank you, Maurena Koutou.
We're both members of the National Employment Law Committee of the New Zealand Law Society, Te Kahui Ture o Aotearoa.
I'm a barrister in Wellington.
I've got over 30 years' experience in employment law, which covers two holidays acts and two decades in large law firms.
And Michael is an associate with Meredith Connell in Auckland and prior to that he was a judge's clerk in the Employment Court in Auckland.
The approach taken by the New Zealand Law Society when commenting on proposed legislation is a neutral one in terms of policy.
So we're seeking to provide you with feedback on the workability of the legislation, identifying potential issues and drafting.
And as law is our natural view, our natural review mechanism is to think about how we might explain it to our clients.
Our written submission makes a number of comments that are directed to the predictability and certainty of the proposed legislation, but we'll focus only on three of those points today and then leave a few minutes for questions from you.
So I'll start with a standard hours point that we make in our submission.
The bill is premised on standard hours being specified in an employment agreement, roster or notional roster.
And that's the baseline or foundation for annual leave, public holidays, bereavement leave, sick leave, domestic violence leave, et cetera.
So it's really important as a concept in this draft legislation.
So just to start with a practical issue, at the moment, standard hours isn't required in employment agreements.
The employment relations that brings in more flexibility than that and it refers to a requirement to include an indication of the arrangements relating to the times the employer is to work.
So you see some quite flexible and fluid clauses at the moment in employment agreements.
So there's going to be some transition needed if we go with a standard hours notion from what currently is quite flexible and where many employment agreements won't have standard or set hours specified.
And it's not quite clear how that transition is going to be addressed.
This leads to the second issue about standard hours, which is the bill requires that but doesn't provide a fallback mechanism if the hours aren't specified in any of those ways.
So where the employer and employee simply don't agree and they stick with their current employment agreement, what happens then?
The third issue is whether the standard hours truly reflect what the employee works.
And I listened earlier this morning to some of the industry submissions which have explained the implication of that for how the time off part of leave is calculated.
For the Law Society, our concern is two-fold.
First is that the standard hours might not reflect the current reality.
But second, the shall we say less honourable employers might deliberately set low standard hours knowing that the employees will happily, voluntarily work additional hours in order to boost their pay to that point.
But that means they don't have annual leave and the other actual time off entitlements that accrue at the rate that they're actually working.
The second point I'm going to touch on is what we colloquially know as time and a half for payment on public holidays.
If I can be frank, the clause relating to that one, two, four, it's quite long.
It has cross references in itself and references between some clauses that are quite difficult to follow.
It's one of those clauses that you read and you wonder how you might actually explain that to anybody in terms of how it's meant to work.
So it is complicated. The second point about it is that there are two mechanisms for the time and a half.
So there's one for time and that's what the employer is required to pay the employee for each hour worked.
And then the half has a different calculation and that's greater of 50% of the employee's ordinary hourly rate and any identifiable amount.
So you're doing one calculation for the time and then another one for the half and by no means a payroll expert,
but I think that's going to complicate things as people try to put this in practice.
So those calculation parts might not be the same, which risks the calculations being very complex to do.
So I'll hand over to Michael now to talk about our final point, which is the remediation issue.
Thank you, Karen, and good morning everyone.
So I'm just going to speak to you briefly about the proposed remediation process for outstanding liabilities under the Holidays Act
and those provisions are at Clause 156 in Schedule 3 of the bill.
It's proposed that that process will have retrospective effect and could be used to remediate underpayments and payment failures,
which for whatever reason have occurred up to four years prior to the bill receiving the Royal Ascent.
We're concerned that the material relating to the bill does not discuss whether the retrospective provisions are appropriate.
There does not seem to be any consideration of whether retrospectivity can adversely impact either employers or employees,
for example by reducing or extinguishing some employee's statutory entitlements.
Second, whether the extent of the retrospectivity is appropriate or if it requires adjustment.
And third, whether this process could upset or lead to relitigation of settled matters.
We also have concerns as to whether it is appropriate to prescribe the substantive content of those retrospective provisions through regulations,
rather than through primary legislation, because regulations would not be subject to the same level of public and parliamentary scrutiny.
Those concerns are heightened as the bill does not require the Minister to undertake public consultation on the draft regulations
in circumstances where statutory entitlements are impacted.
Finally, we have concerns about regulations that would specify a minimum amount payable, a term that is in that undefined category that I just spoke about,
would be defined through the regulations, because the regulations would not be subject to the same level of parliamentary and public scrutiny.
This would mean an employer would not be required to make a remediation payment to an employee whose entitlement is below this threshold.
It raises fairness concerns as the threshold could bar an employee from receiving a payment.
They are otherwise entitled to receive, no matter how small the amount.
Those concerns are heightened because we do not know at what level that threshold will be set or how it will be calculated.
A similar concern arises around the concept of reasonable compensation,
given that also appears to contemplate something less than their existing statutory entitlements.
We advise you to seek advice on those matters and to consider whether amendments are necessary to address those concerns.
I'll hand over four questions if there's any time.
Thank you very much. We do have a short amount of time, but we do have one question.
That doesn't appear we have any. We have a question from Jan Taniti.
Thank you Madam Chair, and thank you very much for your submission.
It kind of backs up in many respects what some of the industry bodies have been saying as you said.
One thing I want to get there, you talked about if there is not-so-savory employers as such and what they might do in this situation.
Put it in simple terms, and I'm trying to get my head around this too.
Does that mean that they could be incentivising part-time and casualisation workers in this particular case?
Because it could mean that they're paying out less in the annual leave?
To answer that vaguely, yes, possibly.
But also you could have full-time employees who are put on say 35 or 30 hours a week.
I mean it may be that you're thinking of that as part-time, which is probably right.
But work greater hours than that. So they might say work-have the standard hours of 30 or 35 in their agreement,
but work much more than that on a regular basis.
I think there is a possibility of some, and I'm hesitating to use this word, but some abuse of the system,
particularly by unscrupulous employers who are trying to limit how much time off people actually have,
particularly if they have to bring in replacement employees at a higher cost.
Great, thank you. Thank you for that. And a question from Lauren Tsunan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just a very quick question regarding the standard hours as well.
Do you have any data or would this be an understanding of the current average hours that employees actually worked a week?
And potentially is it greater than the standard hours that we're seeing now?
The reason I ask this question is, you know, we hear anecdotally,
but I want to check if there's any data to say that people are working longer and longer hours
that are unseen or unaccounted for in their contract.
That's not data that the law society would hold, so the answer to your question is no, we don't have that data.
It might be held by the Victoria University Employment Relations Centre.
They do an annual analysis of collective agreements and what provisions are in those.
So the data may be somewhere, but it's not held by us, I'm afraid.
Thank you. We might look into that. Thank you so much.
All right. Thank you very much. We appreciate your participation in the process.
You're very constructive and helpful as a mission. So thank you again.
Thank you.
On now to have a similar theme, Simpson-Greason.
We have Rachel Judge and Mike Mercer joining us.
Rachel and Mike, we have 10 minutes with you this morning, and that includes time for questions.
Thank you.
I am Rachel Judge, a partner at Simpson-Greason, and I'm presenting with my colleague, Mike Mercer,
Senior Associate. We have both been heavily involved in advising on the current
Holidays Act and assisting clients through their remediation processes.
And we thank you for the opportunity to present our oral submission today on behalf of Simpson-Greason.
The submission has been informed by feedback from a number of our clients and also in line
with what Karen's just spoken to, our own observations as lawyers as to where complexities may arise
based on the wording of the current bill.
At the outset, I do want to note that Simpson-Greason supports the core objectives of the bill.
We have been actively advocating for many of these changes for a number of years,
in particular the move to an hours-based accrual model and the simplification of leave payment calculations.
That said, there are some aspects of the bill that are likely to pose some compliance issues for employers
and particularly those with complex workforces.
So we do consider that there is room for the bill to potentially include some options to address some of those issues.
And we wish to comment on three key issues from our written submissions where we have made recommendations.
Those are the notional roster, the mandatory standard hours versus additional hours leave compensation payment approach,
which we'll refer to as LCP, and the issue of strike action during the transitional period.
So just turning to the notional roster framework to start with,
this applies to determined leave entitlements where an employee's standard hours or days of work cannot be readily identified.
And while the policy intent is understood, we submit that the framework as drafted may not be workable in practice for many employers.
Clause 9, for example, requires that a notional roster is agreed in writing and kept up to date
in workplaces where hours are variable or changed frequently, that will be difficult if not impossible to apply.
The combination of a requirement for agreement and then continual updating risks, continuous negotiation,
creating significant administrative burden and also employee relations issues flowing from all of that.
For large employers and particularly those with unionized workforces, this is unlikely to be practicable.
There is also a level of uncertainty in the role a notional roster is intended to play, although it's described as notional.
The provisions do require it to reflect actual working patterns to a certain extent and to be revised as those patterns change.
So this risks blurring the distinction between a genuine notional construct and an operational roster and, in our view,
risks undermining the purpose of introducing a simplified mechanism in the first place.
We recognize that there is provision at clauses 10 and 11 for a Labour Inspector to determine a notional roster where agreement cannot be reached,
but we consider that reliance on Labour Inspector determinations as the sole fallback is likely to result in increased disputes, delay and litigation.
So on this point we submit that the framework would be materially improved by introducing an express alternative mechanism
where clause 9 could be amended to provide that where it is not reasonably practicable for an employer and employee to agree a notional roster,
that agreement is not required as a precondition to determining those standard hours for leave purposes
and in line with that that clause 10 is amended to allow an employer without Labour Inspector intervention to determine a notional roster
by applying some form of agreed averaging method and we're hearing from our clients that if some form of rolling average
were applied such as the 13 week average that that's something that could be workable for them going forward.
I'll now hand over to Mike Mercer to discuss the further two points we wanted to raise.
Thank you, Rachel.
Further, the two points I want to speak to, the first relates to the lead compensation approach and like our learner friends from the New Zealand Law Society,
we addressed the mechanism for additional hours being paid by the lead compensation payment.
While we understand this is intended to provide certainty and to avoid the accumulation of large leave liabilities,
there are two circumstances where hours of work will fluctuate and it could create some outcomes for an employer that are not consistent with the bill
and operational difficulties. In particular, the structure of the lead compensation payment will create incentive for employees to favour being paid
in a cash loading rather than accruing leave and the resist agreement to standard hours.
What we're hearing from clients who are really concerned about their ability to agree with standard hours with their employees is that given the attractiveness of lead compensation payment,
you could end up in a situation that is different from what has been discussed previously with actually employees all time including who would prefer to end up on low standard hours with large additional hours
that would provide the disincentive to them taking sick leave when needed and significantly receive their reduced pay when they do so.
The bill doesn't currently allow for alternative approaches that may reduce the same or better outcome for employees.
In practice, we are hearing from clients who have a strong preference to accrue leave on all hours work including additional hours while others may prefer the pay-as-you-go model of the lead compensation payment.
Either approach would be broadly neutral and effective for employees that have a get-leave paid at the time or the ability to take it later.
In our view, there is scope to deliver on the intent of the bill for allowing greater flexibility in how lead entitlements are delivered without jeopardising employee protections or entitlements.
We therefore recommend that clauses 129 and 132 of the bill be amended to allow employers as an alternative to paying lead compensation on additional hours to accrue leave on all hours work in addition including those additional hours at their election.
The second point we wish to raise relates to strike action during the transitional period.
It is inevitable that there will be areas of disagreement during the transition process given the new lead framework will require significant changes to existing employment agreements, payroll systems and operational practices.
We are concerned that without clear limits, disputes arising solely from the application of the transitional provisions may become the subject of strike action or lockouts.
There is precedent that unions and employees cannot participate in unlawful industrial action even when it otherwise relates to bargaining if the issue in dispute arises from a legislatively defined process by way of example.
The Fair Pay Agreements Act in 2022 which has since been repealed included expressed restrictions on industrial action in relation to fair pay bargaining.
We therefore recommend that the bill be amended to provide that disputes arising solely from the application or operation of the transitional provisions cannot be subject to industrial action during the transitional period.
This could be achieved by adopting a similar approach to that in the All My Fair Pay Agreement Act and in this context disagreements about the conversion, reconciliation or technical application of the transition rules should be treated as procedural matters
and resolved from interpretation, guidance or dispute resolves and mechanisms via the employment institutions rather than industrial action.
Thank you Madam Chair and members of the select committee.
We are prepared to take any questions at this time.
We have one minute and I doesn't appear that we do and can I just say it's not a reflection of the lack of interest.
I have to make that very clear.
You always put forward incredibly comprehensive and helpful submission and I thank you for that.
And I know that our officials would thank you for that too.
Thank you.
Very good.
So we'll move on now to our next submitter.
Thank you.
We have Madfly Limited Trading.
We have Sherilyn Walther.
Hopefully I'm pronouncing your surname correctly.
Enterprise and Staffing Innovations New Zealand if that makes more sense to you.
Apologies.
Having a few technical issues there.
I hope you can have me.
That's okay.
Easy.
You've got to have me.
Right.
Sorry.
Apology.
Let's just get that right.
I haven't seen your logo.
Sorry.
It is actually a trading name of Madfly Limited.
So thank you Madam Chairman and members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear today and speak to EZNZ's written submission on the Employment Leave Bill.
My name is Sherilyn Walther and I'm the Managing Director appearing on behalf of Enterprise and Staffing Innovations NZ.
My name is Sherilyn Walther, otherwise known as EZNZ.
By way of background, EZNZ provides practical employment relations and HR support to businesses across New Zealand.
A big part of our work is helping clients with the operational employment issues that come up every day in real workplaces.
Things like leave, payroll, payroll interpretation, rostering process and documentation.
These are matters that can look quite straightforward on paper but if they're handled incorrectly, they can very quickly turn into disputes.
The condition of our clients is small to medium sized businesses.
For those businesses, getting employment processes wrong is not just frustrating.
It's expensive, distracting and disruptive.
Most do not have in-house legal teams or large HR functions, if at all.
They're trying to do the right thing but they need the law to be clear and they need it to be workable.
When disputes do arise, even a claim with little or no merit can still cost up to $10,000 to defend
and costs alone before you factor in management time stress and disruption to the business.
So from our perspective, clarity and employment legislation really matters.
If the law is too technical, too uncertain or too hard to apply in day-to-day operations, the consequences are very real.
With that in mind, our overall position on this is that we support the direction of reform but we say the bill still needs refinement.
We support the objective behind the bill.
The current leave framework is too complicated.
It's been difficult for employers to understand and difficult for payroll systems to properly apply.
And it's led to too many errors and too much uncertainty so reform is needed.
We support the intention of creating a simpler and clearer leave system.
But our key message today is that simplification should not come at the cost of fairness, operational workability or new compliance risks.
In our view, the bill makes some very positive changes but there are still several areas where it needs tightening
so it does not simply replace one set of problems with another.
So there are parts of the bill that we clearly support.
We support prorated sick leave occurring from the first day of employment.
That's easier to understand and it better reflects service over time.
We support annual leave occurring from day one.
That's much easier to explain than the current distinction between a crude leave and annual leave becoming available only after 12 months.
And we support clearer rules around public holidays and otherwise working days.
But the clarity in the area should reduce uncertainty and reduce the risk of underpayment issues.
So this is not a submission opposing reform, quite the opposite.
We support reform. We just want to make sure the reform is genuinely workable in practice.
Our biggest concern is the 12.5% leave compensation payment for hours above minimum contracted hours.
This is probably our most significant concern.
We're concerned about the proposal to require a leave compensation payment of at least 12.5% for additional hours and casual hours.
That may appear simple at a high level but in practice it creates real problems for businesses where workers have genuine ongoing employment and regular patterns of work
but may work more than they guaranteed minimum hours.
This is a very common arrangement especially in small to medium businesses.
In many cases businesses will guarantee for example 30 hours a week but regularly offer more.
The reason for that is practical.
In sectors such as agriculture and construction the amount of work available is often heavily dependent on weather conditions and changing operational demands.
Businesses are trying to provide employees with a reliable minimum while still retaining the flexibility to offer more hours when conditions allow.
So a person may be contracted for 30 hours but often work 40 when the weather is favorable and work can proceed.
This is like construction that could actually be even more so you might work more hours in the summer than you do in the winter.
That does not make them casual in the ordinary sense.
Our concern is that if every hour above guaranteed minimum automatically attracts a 12.5% leave payment that creates a number of problems.
So it creates more payroll complexity, not less.
It increases labour cost immediately.
It may reduce the employee's ability to build up meaningful paid leave over time
and it may encourage a system where leave is effectively cashed out as work happens instead of being preserved as time away from work.
From our perspective that's not just a payroll issue, it's also a well-being issue.
So our recommendation is that the bill should draw a clearer distinction between genuine casual work and ordinary additional hours worked in ongoing employment.
Where there is a real ongoing employment there should be a pathway for leave to recruit rather than requiring automatic pay as you go treatment.
So the bill also needs to be clearer and more practical treatment of casual employment.
Closely linked to the 12.5% leave compensation payment is the question of casual work.
One of the real issues for employers is knowing when a worker who starts out as a casual has in reality become regular.
That matters because it affects payroll treatment, leave treatment, legal risks and fairness.
If the bill is going to rely on a separate model for casual employees then it needs to be much clearer about when someone is genuinely casual and when they're no longer casual.
Otherwise we're just creating a new uncertainty in place of an old one.
So our recommendation is that the bill include either a clearer statutory test or a review point so that where work becomes regular and predictable the employee moves into the ordinary accrual work-frame or framework.
The bill should also avoid creating unfairness between casual and permanent workers.
We're also concerned about parity on this one.
If a casual worker receives 12.5% upfront but a permanent worker accrues leave that only becomes valuable when it's actually taken then there's a real possibility of inequitable outcomes between different categories of workers.
We're not suggesting casual workers should be disadvantaged, that's not our point.
Our point is that simplification should still produce fair outcomes across the workforce.
The committee should test carefully whether the structure of the bill creates unintended imbalance between workers who may be doing similar work but under different employment arrangements.
So next we have KiwiSaver and Commission need to be expressly clarified.
We also think the bill should be clearer on some points around the remuneration issues.
The first is KiwiSaver.
The treatment of KiwiSaver in relation to leave compensation payments should be set out clearly in the legislation.
If it's not employers and payroll providers will take different approaches and that inconsistency will create exactly the kind of confusion this reform is trying to fix.
The second is commission and nondiscretionary incentive payments.
A simpler leave model should not result in regular commission income being left out of leave calculations where that income is a normal part of the employee's earnings.
If that happens, employees in commission based or incentive based roles may end up worse off when taking leave and that creates a real disincentive to take and leave at all.
That would be an unfair outcome and would undermine the broader purpose of leave entitlements.
So we say the bill should expressly preserve the inclusion of regular nondiscretionary payment and similar payments or provide a mechanism that properly captures them.
The variable hour work is still not fully resolved especially around day based leave and notional rosters.
Our final point is that the bill does not yet fully resolve the practical issues that arise for workers with variable hours and variable days.
We remain concerned about day based leave, particularly bereavement leave and family violence leave.
Where people do not work the same pattern each week there can be uncertainty about what counts as a day, how part days should be treated and how leaves should apply across changing rosters.
We're also concerned about notional rosters.
At the moment the bill does not seem to give enough practical certainty about when a notional roster is required, what information is needed to create one and when it should be reviewed.
Without that clarity there's a real risk of more inconsistency, more confusion and ultimately more disputes.
At the very least we think that the legislation or supporting regulations should include clearer guidance and practical worked examples before the bill comes into force.
So in closing our message is a straightforward one.
We support the goal of this bill.
We support day one accrual for sick leave and annual leave.
And we support clearer public holiday rules.
But we ask the committee to refine the bill so it does not simplify shift complexity from one part of the system to another.
Sorry it does not simply shift complexity, sorry.
In particular we ask the committee to look carefully at the 12.5% leave compensation rule, the treatment of casual work, fairness between casual and permanent workers,
key we save a treatment, commission and incentive payments and the practical operation of day based leave and notional rosters.
If these areas are improved we think the bill will be stronger, fairer and much more workable in the real world.
Thank you for your time and I'm happy to answer questions if you've got time.
Thank you very much Sherilyn.
We do believe and I think we've run out of time with you we have unfortunately.
But thank you so much for being part of this process and I've got to say a really good submission, really helpful.
And I assume and assure you sorry that the officials will be pleased too.
Thank you very much.
Now to essential HR, Mike Johnson, who I believe is online.
Mike, there we are wonderful.
Okay man I went.
Yes.
That was a quick submission.
There we go Mike.
10 minutes for you includes time for questions and we'll hand it over to you now.
Then I go to a good morning.
I'm Mike Johnson from essential HR.
And I want to thank you for giving me an opportunity to speak to you all.
Madam Chairman and members of the committee.
I'd like to start by saying how impressed I am with the draft legislation.
He's had a horrible starting place being the Holidays Act and so many things to to address and it does.
From my point of view really I really sense some positive development moving ahead from the Holidays Act.
And a very clear attempt to address a wide range of issues things like casual staff and the pro-ratering of sick leave from day one, dealing with on call and stuff like that.
Yeah, raise my hat to you all.
And especially as you now try and process everything that's coming at you in this consultation.
Now I speak on behalf of SMEs.
I have some 400 or 500 whom I provided HR advice to.
And I've been pleased that I can already go back to them and confirm for many of them that their concerns will be addressed in the new legislation.
And there'll always be some of course that are not.
There is one though in particular, and it's the first and significant issue that I referred to in my written submission that I want to address today.
And I strongly suggest you consider the particular recommendation that I'm going to make.
And the reality is that this is all about enabling small businesses to comply with the legislation.
So I want you to start by picturing an SME, maybe a small retail outlet, a cafe, a restaurant, a roofing contractor.
There are any number of them whose workload is dependent on the weather or on a daily varying level of customer demand.
We all know them and these businesses can thrive, but that's especially where staff are working as a team.
They dig deep sometimes. They leave early where that benefits the business.
They'll work a Saturday to help make up time.
And for these and many others, compliance with the holidays act was just a nightmare.
There was no way a business owner could understand what was needed to comply.
So they relied on their payroll provider to do things right.
But we all know that at some stage, all payroll systems were non-compliant with the holidays act.
And yet it was the SME who bore the brunt and the cost of a labor inspector's audit and its resulting penalties.
And it just didn't seem right.
For example, how many payroll systems that you know do you think would cope easily with a roster that has somebody working Wednesday, seven hours, Thursday, 10, Friday, 10, Saturday, 14 and a half, Sunday, two, with sleepovers in between each of them, then three days rest and then going through the whole thing again.
It was a roster that effectively is an eight-day revolving roster, but payroll systems just couldn't cope with it.
It was almost not possible to comply with the legislation.
We need something similar, something simple, rather not similar, something simple to manage what have become some of the most complex of rosters.
And while this bill has gone so far, it can easily go a step further in removing complexity.
It's a real challenge when it comes to drafting legislation, I know.
And I just pulled out section one, two, three of the bill, section two, subsection two, where the employee's leave payment must not be less than the rate of leave payment for each relevant hour that the employee takes as a period of leave,
or that he does not work on a public holiday that would otherwise be a working day, et cetera, et cetera.
For most business owners, if you present them with that, it's not that it's wrong, it's not, it's correct.
But it's just that it leaves them saying, the business owners are never going to get their heads around it.
For the SMEs that I had you picturing before, there's no simple standard hours.
And the many additional hours may or may not be linked to an availability clause, because for many of them it's actually just part of their commitment to their jobs.
So we need a simpler way to collect dollars for leave payments broadly, and for ease of understanding and to avoid having to rely on the payroll provider for compliance.
So please, can we have just a few very simple rules built into this legislation?
The first one, for every dollar that you earn, you put aside or that somebody earns, you put aside another 12.5 cents for leave, 8.5 probably for annual leave, 4 for sick leave.
For every hour worked, you accrue the 0.0769 hours plus 0.0385 hours.
For every uncertain otherwise working day, we use the 13 weeks.
It is great. You've got some very simple stuff already built into the draft legislation.
Take it that step further that all earnings get treated the same way.
You don't separate out standard hours from other hours.
That everything that relates to hours worked or protection of employment or employment status, leave that with the Employment Relations Act.
We don't need to muddy the waters within the Employment Leave Act.
And leave it so that payroll providers are doing just that. They're providing a payroll service.
I really urge you to press on. Don't allow the tightness of the timeframe to stop you from making that extra change and making it that little bit more simple that employers will be able to comply.
Are there any questions?
Thank you, Mike. Don't appear to have any questions.
Oh, we have one from Pam Jay.
Thank you so much. When you started your submission, Mike, you sounded like you're fully supportive of this legislation.
And then of course you want this legislation to go a bit further than when I read your first line in your submission, it says you're neither supporting nor opposing this bill.
So why so undecided?
Okay. Thank you for pointing that out. I tend to start most of my submissions in that sort of way.
I mean, on the whole, yes, I'm very supportive of what you're changing. I'd far rather see this go through than not go through.
I would love to see, though, that one step more, make it even simpler, make it even easier for small business owners to comply.
Can I just say, Mike, thank you just to acknowledge the things that we've heard again and again today that are workable and then the things that you think can be improved and how constructive you've been with that.
So it's really helpful for our officials and moving forward as well. So thanks for your time. Thanks for your participation.
We'll now move on to our next letter. Thank you, Mike.
Good luck.
Thank you. We now have Paul McKay from Business New Zealand.
Joining us on Zoom.
Paul, can I just check that you're online? There we are. Wonderful.
Yes.
Welcome, Paul. We have 10 minutes with you for Business New Zealand, and that includes time for questions.
And sorry, I hadn't acknowledged you. We have you, John, as well.
Ah, John, are you with Business New Zealand or EMA?
I'm with the EMA, but we're one of the core members of Business New Zealand, and so I'm just listening in on Paul's submission.
No worries.
Paul will be likewise here. You'll join us. We're together.
Okay.
Yes.
Hence your submissions are one after the other.
Right.
Paul, over to you. You've got 10 minutes, and that includes time for questions. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
And I welcome this opportunity to talk to the submission.
I'm Paul McKay.
I'm the Manager of Employment Relations Policy at Business New Zealand.
And I have a history with the Holidays Act going back to 2003.
This is our most recent week of every review since.
We're very pleased to see this bill.
It contains essentially the elements that we have always asked for, which is a simplified approach, an ausbestax cruel approach.
And so, therefore, our submission is designed in support of the bill.
But to highlight two or three things, which we think like a number of the previous submitters have said would be benefits from a simplification.
And also to point out some of the issues that might arise if we can't get that kind of simplification.
Some of the issues have already been covered, so I won't deal with them in detail,
but I will come back to them.
But I'd like to spend a little bit of time first on the remediation process.
As it's written in the bill, there is a process in the bill that doesn't have the criteria
that would allow a decision to be made.
And the process doesn't come into effect until the rest of the bill comes into effect in two years' time, effectively.
Whereas the regulations that would give the ammunition, if you like, for the process
will be able to be developed as soon as the bill is passed.
That, to us, seems to be an opportunity missed.
The remediation process, after all, is about the history.
It's about the current act and the pitfalls that have been found in terms of how hard it is to make payments.
And the history of the last few years has been full of many thousands of hours, many thousands,
many hundreds of thousands of dollars of cost in terms of remediating and getting agreement to processes.
What we would rather see, perhaps, is rather than have a schedule come into effect in two years' time
and regulations that can be developed at any time from the native ascent,
is to put it all together and say, why don't we have the process and the criteria
able to be developed together and as soon as they're available, they can be used.
That would be the first element of our suggestion.
But the second is, as it stands in the bill, the process effectively allows the employer to choose to use the process
and without the permission of the employers who would be affected by it.
That has some potential ramifications, particularly in relation to the Wages Protection Act,
because it seems to us that an employee whose pay has not been correctly determined under the current act
is, as it is now, currently entitled to have that put right.
And yet the remediation process, as we heard from an earlier submitter,
may contain elements that have an averaging or a near enough, good enough answer to it,
which may in fact leave that employee short of what they would otherwise get
if they were properly remediated under the current act.
So we think, and there's no mention of the Wages Protection Act in relation to this,
so there's a potential point to be checked, and it's up to officials to have a look at that,
but we would rather see a process that was developed together in its entirety
so that proper consultation could be undertaken over the development of that process
and through the regulatory process.
And also that the use of it is one that has the employers engaged with it as well
so that they can see that what they're being offered is fair,
and the whole process becomes together as one rather than being in two parts.
So that's remediation as far as we're concerned.
We think that would benefit.
We've also got the issue of, as a number of submitters have made on the leave compensation payment,
but first in relation to rosters, as it stands the bill effectively has a roster
that can contain both standard hours and agreed additional hours.
With the issues that have been raised around the cost of additional hours
and the leave compensation attached to them, we think there's sense,
and most from a payroll point of view, and also a cost and common sense point of view,
that a roster is a roster.
So anything in a roster would be standard hours,
and anything outside a roster would be additional hours.
That, I think, goes a long way to addressing some of the concerns that the law society
and others raised where the cost of additional hours inside a roster,
especially where the rosters are variable, can have quite unforeseen circumstances
or consequences for businesses, certainly additional costs,
and particularly in relation to small businesses, as we heard with the previous submitter,
the variability of costs is one of the things that they confront every day,
simplifying it so that any given roster is known to have a particular cost attached to it
would be of a benefit.
There are a number of other points in our submission which are written down,
so they can be taken as read, I think they're relatively self-explanatory,
so I'd rather leave as much time as possible for questions of that's okay with you.
That is wonderful, Paul, and appreciated by our committee.
We've got a question first from Jan Tinedy.
Thank you, Paul. Lovely to see you.
Can I also acknowledge the work that you've done in the Holidays Act over the years
and it's been very much appreciated across governments
and very much put into use I can see in this bill and how it's been written.
But I want to go back to that question, and you might have heard my question before
when I asked the Law Society, you talk about rosters and using the rosters.
One of the reasons why we voted against this bill at the first reading
is that we feel that there are people, as it's written at the moment,
who would be missing out on their leave allocations.
With your, and the way that this bill is written at the moment,
would the way that you have written this suggest with the rosters
and work that's sitting on roster, would that solve that issue, do you think?
It would go a long way towards it, and I think it's actually of a benefit
to both employees and employers.
First of all, if you add anything in a roster being
the so-called agreed additional hours and standard hours,
should attract leave accrual, but not necessarily the extra payment.
So there's a benefit to the employee and they would get,
they would crew leave on all of the hours they worked inside their roster
and the benefit to the employer is they're not paying extra costs
simply because a portion of that roster is so-called additional hours.
So I think there's a good way to balancing out that issue.
I don't claim to, and I'm certainly not a payroll expert,
I don't claim that it would solve all problems,
but we think it would go quite a way towards it.
No, and I totally get that, but could you explain to me what,
so I'm just trying to think of a scenario
where you would work outside of a roster.
Have you got a scenario where you'd be work,
there would be work outside of the roster?
There's quite often situations, I'll use a manufacturing example
because I've had that kind of experience where people have a standard roster
that their shift roster if you like,
but then there are times when, for instance,
the mill is shut down for maintenance
and that roster is still working,
but then there's a whole lot of other extra work to be done for maintenance
so that people agree that they will add another four or five hours
to their normal roster shift pattern to accommodate that extra work
and that would become their pattern for that period of time
and then normally revert back to their normal operational roster.
So the way that the bill is cast is that all of those additional hours
would attract more money, but they wouldn't attract any more leave,
whereas the post, so there's a double whammy for both employee
and employer in having just the payment for the extra hours
and no leave for the employee.
It's quite common to have rosters shift around in terms of their variability.
Most rosters, I have to say, most rosters are pretty standard.
You've got your standard 80-hour roster or your standard 12-hour roster,
but overall there can be many, many occasions when they vary
for very good reason, but they're done in a structured way
and not the kind of can-you-work-over-time-tomorrow-night kind of way,
but in the kind of we've got a big order coming in,
we want to put a whole lot of extra shift in
or extra hours-on-shifts for the next period
while we get this big order out. That's not an uncommon situation.
And we have a question now from Pam Sheikpama.
Thank you so much, Paul, for your submission.
So this is about your support in principle for LCP.
We have had some submitters this morning who think
that it is not a good idea because it actually undermines
the core purpose of paid leave.
So that paid leave time is time that people should be spending
with their family doing other things.
So what would you say to those who think that LCP
is not a good idea?
I've lost you there.
I'm not saying again.
Oh, sorry.
Are you there, Paul?
It's closer.
Closer, I think.
Right, John, did you want to be able to answer that question?
To be honest, Paul probably got more technical expertise
on that, so I'm happy to start with a bit of
talking about the EMA submission and Paul, as you were saying.
Oh, Paul's there. No, that's all right.
We do have one more question after this.
If you could answer that quickly, we'll move on to the next question.
That'd be great. Thank you, Paul.
So I missed that piece.
I dropped out and came back again.
No, we know.
So because you support LCP in principle,
and we have had some submitters who support LCP,
they say that it actually undermines the whole purpose of paid leave
because paid leave is about people having their own time
time with their family.
So what would you say?
LCP is useful in the sense that it deals with the costs of,
particularly in the casual work side of things,
but having it attached to additional hours inside
what you might call standard hours or rosters creates a cost.
It is also problematic when it comes to sick leave
because additional hours are not normally part of something
a person would get sick leave for.
So we have some concerns.
We've detailed that in our submission in relation to the quantum
of the leave compensation payment,
but the principle of it we are very supportive of.
We have a question from Vanessa Weening.
Thank you very much, Paul.
In one of the earliest submissions, there was a statement
around the fact that Business New Zealand,
CTU and MB had been working on this for a while
and sort of an implication that what has come out of this process
wasn't quite what was expected.
How do you react to that?
Things have moved from time.
We had the review in 2018, which was a consensus-based document
with recommendations that resulted in a shadow or an exposure draft,
which we had significant issues with it
and made things much more complicated.
The move to an hours-based accrual approach
is the single biggest factor we think
which is going to make an improvement in everything.
And so we've seen, we've seen an evolution of this.
So it wasn't what we expected in the first place
because that's not what we agreed in 2018,
but we've evolved to a point where we're particularly comfortable
with the overall direction of this.
Marvellous. Thank you.
Great. All right.
So let's move on now to you again
as the EMA Employment Manufacturers Association.
So Paul, we have you and I believe John as Alan is unable to join us.
So we'll let John start with that.
Okay. Wonderful.
Thank you.
So as an introduction, I'm John Fraser McKenzie.
I'm the Chief Executive of the EMA
and I would like to add in my former career,
I worked as both the CFO, CEO and business owner
of businesses with 2,000 employees, 1,000 employees,
and as the owner of a business with five employees.
So I have been a victim of the current legislation
and a number of different guys as before.
So the EMAs are where the largest business association New Zealand,
we believe we represent about 20% of the country's workforce
across both very large significant businesses
like foodstuffs and conterra down to very small businesses.
We're a national association.
We're focused on the heartland,
the commercial heartland of New Zealand
and we've been around for 140 years.
So in terms of the current discussion,
we did our first submission on the current act
over eight years ago.
So we've been very involved with it
as Paul and business New Zealand.
So I'd just like to talk to our process
about testing and getting some input from members.
So we've tested the substance of the bill
with more than 600 members
across a highly interactive series of road shows
in both in Torunga, Hamilton, Whangarei and Auckland.
And the people who attended those road shows
were payroll and HR specialists
and they really tore apart the fabric of the proposals
and applied it to their workplaces.
So we had a very interactive process with them
and we fed that feedback back to MB
and so various points are reflected in the draft bill.
So we've had a very thorough interrogation of what's in there.
We also had the opportunity to run it
past approximately 2,000 of our members
at our regular briefing series,
which we run across 16 different venues
and that's through the Upper North Island
that took place at the end of last year.
And we've also had some detailed workshops
with select members which range from complex workplaces,
supports, distribution centres, retail and healthcare
and they're also part of some workshops
and confidential focus groups with MB.
So we've had an extensive engagement
with a multitude of businesses
and that's what's informed our submission.
We also have internally our own experts
in employment law, collector bargaining
and employment relations
and to pull apart the legislation.
So collectively our internal experts
have over 80 years of experience in the field
and again that's been informative for our submission.
We all agree that the legislation
is a vast improvement on the current one.
That would be a big step forward for business.
We strongly support the new bill
and we would like to be given some time to test it
and to improve itself
and to make necessary amendments as time goes by.
We do need some stability
to see how the new legislation plays out
but we do think it's both simpler for employers and employees
and so are very supportive.
And as I mentioned before,
we do support the changes
reflected by business NZ
and in our submission
and as Paul is more of a technical expert than I am,
I think he is on hand to help answer any of your questions
on the EMA submission
with which Paul is very familiar.
Thank you.
Wonderful.
Do we have any questions from the committee?
It appears not
and as I've said earlier in the day,
not a reflection of a lack of interest.
You've had a very comprehensive couple of submissions
that have been really helpful for us and for our officials.
Thank you for your involvement
and your contribution for acknowledging you
and your involvement over time as well
to get it to where we are.
Thank you Paul.
Thank you.
Great.
We'll move on now to NYIB.
Have in the room.
Welcome.
We have
Courtney and Louise and Abbi with us.
We have 10 minutes with you.
That includes time for questions
and it's over to you now.
Thank you.
Thank you to the committee members
for hearing from us today.
My name is Courtney Sloan
and I'm head of Government Relations for NYIB
across Australia and New Zealand.
I'm joined by my colleagues
and Louise Hoffman, who is head of Corporate Affairs
for New Zealand
and Louise Dahmer,
who is our Solutions Manager
of Consulting Solutions at NYIB.
She can answer any technical questions
you have about our product today.
NYIB has been a leading provider
of payroll and business management software
for local small and mid-sized businesses
for over 30 years.
We see firsthand how various legislative settings
translate into real-world outcomes
for our customers and their employees.
Our submission and our comments today reflect
our views as a technology provider
and centre on the clarity
both we and our customers need
to adhere to the law.
Across New Zealand,
smaller mid-sized businesses rely on software like ours
to interpret and apply the law correctly
and when the rules are complex,
the risk of error increases.
For many years,
employers and employees have faced complexity
and uncertainty in how leave entitlements
are calculated and applied.
In our view, this bill represents
a positive step towards a more transparent,
consistent and workable system.
In particular, the move to an hours-based
accrual model significantly simplifies
calculations, improves clarity
for employees and employers,
and reduces the likelihood
of unintentional non-compliance.
It is a practical reform
that better aligns with our modern
workplaces of working today.
At the same time, the scale of change
required to implement these reforms
would not be underestimated.
Delivering compliant payroll systems
involves product development,
extensive testing, customer
education and transition support.
This is a multi-phase process
that requires careful sequencing
across government, software providers,
payroll professionals, unions
and employees.
While we welcome the proposed transition period,
we encourage the committee
to carefully consider how that transition
is structured.
Careful staging within the two-year transition period
with clear milestones
and an allowance for pilot programs
will be critical to reducing
any implementation risk
in ensuring all parties are ready.
Our submission outlines several recommendations
we believe would strengthen the bill
and support a successful transition
for businesses and workers alike.
We welcome your questions today.
Wonderful. We have a question from Grant McAllen.
Thank you.
Earlier, one of the earlier submitters
made the comment that
legislation was being designed
by more
to make it easy for payroll companies
to deliver the product
rather than to make
it fairer for the workers.
That was a
quote from an earlier submitter.
Any comments, please?
I think for us,
we simply seek clarity
and when there's clarity in the legislation
employees are more likely
to receive the entitlements that they're entitled to
and employers are more able
to understand their obligations.
Software is an important part of that
because employing businesses rely on software
to ensure that they're paying
their workers entitlements correctly.
So,
I wouldn't necessarily agree
with the assertion that this has been designed
with software in mind.
However, I would say that
having clarity of rules
makes it easier for software
to help its customers adhere to the law
and get workers what they're entitled to.
Thank you.
Do you have a question from Tiana?
That transition period
and you said
that will take structure
and their milestones and stuff like that.
Do you have any
specific ideas around
what you would need to
what kind of barriers
you might see in the way in terms of trying
to iron it all out?
Will the two years be enough
for the two years?
We believe two years is sufficient
just.
We require 18 months to build
the product and then a minimum of 6
months to make sure that our customers are educated
and that the resources are
available for them
to learn about the new system and what their obligations are.
In terms of
sequencing within that two years
our argument is really about
pointing out that
if everyone waits until the end of that two-year period
to have all their systems ready
and in place
we risk being misaligned.
An example of that is
without the necessary guidance
from MBIE
software cannot build the product and
code in the rules that the law requires of us
and if the product is not ready
then the customers and employee
businesses don't know how to use
that new software.
Breaking that two-year period up into
milestones where MBIE guidance
provided in say the first few months
software is ready by 18 months
6 months transition period
for educating customers.
Did you have anything to add?
Not in particular but definitely
the education piece for employees
and employers would be relatively huge
especially things like converting
understanding how to convert their existing lead balances
into the new
rules and so we would
want to be working through a test and learn process
for almost all of that two-year period
to work with customers and understand
how best to implement that
across our customer base.
Great, I have a question from Jan Teneity.
Thank you.
I want to go to your submission
that you talk about subpart A
in the lead compensation payment
and about the clarity
that you as a payroll provider
would require.
Can you talk me through
what the difficulties would be
for you as a provider now
as it's drafted
what are the difficulties that would be
for you
that this LCP would create?
Yeah, I think
what we need to really consider
when we're dealing with these types of calculations
is that when we move
to national rosters, standard hours,
overtime considerations etc
we need to be really clear in rostering
systems and time and attendance systems
how employees rosters are broken down
taking into consideration
for example in a rostered day
what portion of that day
is part of their standard hours
therefore a pro-annual leave
or what portion is an LCP
so we really need some clarity
to be sure that we're building up their rostering systems
in particular and understanding
and interpreting those hours worked
and whether or not things like
an ongoing regular roster
that is planned and approved by the employees
every two weeks then becomes
a notional roster for the purposes
of a pro-annual leave
or whether a notional roster or standard hours
are in place but an employee may be
rostered for a longer period of time
due to any other
reactive factors that a business may have
so economic factors, you know
peak holiday seasons for retail for example
all those types of things
so when we get to a variable employee base
it's very important
that we're clear on what constitutes
standard hours, notional rosters
and the LCP
hours as well
So the way that this is drafted at the moment
is there
the possibility that this would create
greater complexity in this part?
I would probably need to look at that
a little more detail but I think the main thing
for a software provider
is understanding that clarity
around what constitutes a notional roster
for those variable workers
how often can that be updated
all of those types of things so that we can ensure
that when rostering systems are in place
is it looking at the actual rosters, notional rosters
so it's really just about being clear
on the rules there
That's helpful, thank you
Just following
on from a comment earlier
the problems with the current act
there's been a whole lot of issues
and there was
a general interpretation challenge
for the payroll companies as a whole
and lead to a whole lot of
back paying legal issues
and so forth
Are you confident that this new
replacement act is going to be
able to alleviate those concerns
you'd be able to deliver a product that's accurate
Do you want to have a little one?
Yeah, look I think
certainly the simplicity
and clarity that's in the current
that we're seeing comes from in the current draft bill
and from talking
with payroll specialists like
Abby and the rest of the team we have back at NYOB
it is certainly more workable
and ultimately that is
where we would like to see the bill
get to is that it is workable in the system
there is that room
for judgement and interpretation is removed
because that has of course contributed to a lot of those
issues
and that essentially that it's
easily applicable for employers and employees
as well so they can get those entitlements
And just further to that
I'm a McCallum
apologies, the guidance
that we received from MBI early in the process
would be critical for getting
that clarity of interpretation
They didn't quite get it right themselves
last time
It's a very complex piece of legislation
that's for sure
Thank you so much for your contribution to the process
I do appreciate you being here in person
it's refreshing, we're spending a lot of time on screens
and so
yeah thank you again for being here
and we'll move on now
Our next matter
who is online
Guy Van Radis
we have from
Rossmate
Guy, hopefully we have you online
Hello, hello
Welcome, we have 10 minutes
with you this morning that includes time for questions
and we'll leave it to you to
manage your time accordingly
and it's over to you now
Great, thank you
My name is Guy
I'm one of the co-founders of
Rossmate which is one of New Zealand's
leading workforce management platforms
We work with businesses
across the country in almost every industry
from small family-owned
cafes to larger corporations
helping them automate
employee scheduling, time-tracking
and importantly today
leave management
So leave compliance for us
is not just an abstract
policy problem, it is something
we build, test and
work with every single day
I'm here today
because this bill will
ultimately be implemented
into software systems like
Rossmate and I want to offer
my ideas as to how we can go
about making sure that this bill works
in practice and not just in the law
The old system was
broken
It left key terms
like reasonable
undefined
and that forced software vendors
and employers to make judgment calls
which inevitably led to inconsistency
across New Zealand
So it is encouraging
to see that this bill
is introducing clearer
and more structured rules such as
the otherwise working day test
But I believe that there's an opportunity
right now to go
even further and
close the gap between
legislation and
real-world implementation
And so today I would like to offer
two of my ideas
First, an
AI-powered
legislative search tool
This would allow
anyone to describe a real
workplace situation
in plain English and be taken
directly to the relevant parts
of the bill
with those sections clearly highlighted
Importantly, this would not be
a chat box
It would provide advice
or it would not provide advice
or conclusions
Its role would be purely
navigational
Helping users find the right parts of the
legislation quickly and accurately
for whatever scenario they have just described
Because I think even with
the clearer rules
translating the legislation into
real-world scenarios
especially for businesses with
variable rosters or non-standard
patterns will remain
challenging
However, where this would
become extremely powerful
is in the data it generates
Every query could be logged
anonymized and aggregated
to build a real-time picture
of where the legislation is causing
confusion
where edge cases are emerging
and where further clarification
may be needed
Instead of waiting years
for compliance failures
or remediation claims
to reveal these issues
this creates a continuous feedback loop
allowing the legislation to evolve over time
and ambiguity
to be progressively reduced
My second proposal
is a government published
conformance test suite for payroll
and workforce management software
and this is where I feel
most strongly about
because it addresses a critical part
of the problem that is being overlooked
The majority of businesses in New Zealand
do not manage leave manually
they rely on software to do it for them
and when a business adopts
one of those systems
they reasonably assume that it is compliant
in New Zealand law
but in practice
that assumption is not always correct
Many of the systems
used in New Zealand
are built for global markets
where New Zealand is treated as an afterthought
and as a result
compliance issues can be baked into the software itself
meaning businesses
can be doing nothing wrong
without be doing the wrong thing
without realizing it
simply because they trust
the systems they're using
So that is why I believe
MBIE
should publish
a comprehensive conformance test suite
for leave management softwares
This would consist of
a set of canonical test scenarios
each with clearly defined
inputs and exact expected
outputs
These scenarios would go well beyond
the simple examples
and instead cover a full range
of real-world complexity
Software providers would be able to run
these scenarios against their systems
and verify that their calculations
produce the correct results
and if they cannot
their system would not be compliant
Over time
I think that this could form the basis
of a formal certification process
where software used in New Zealand
must pass the conformance suite
in order to be marked as compliant
because if we can get this right
it has a powerful effect
because when the software
is correct
a vast majority of New Zealand businesses
will be compliant as well
It is critical
that software providers are able
to translate this legislation
into code correctly
and that we are all interpreting it
the same way
I think a comprehensive test suite
covering real-world scenarios
is exactly what makes this consistency
possible
So
New Zealand has an opportunity
to do something genuinely world-class
here
not just pass clear legislation
but build the infrastructure
that ensures the legislation
actually works in practice
consistently across every business
that relies on software
to manage their people
and so I urge this
community to think more broadly
about how we can ensure
this legislation works
in the real world
by investing in the systems and frameworks
that make it easy to understand
consistently applied
and reliably built
into the software used by businesses
every day
Thank you Guy
We have time for a couple of quick questions
We have a question from Vanessa Wienek
Thank you Guy
The AI
sort of almost sounds like
the agent that you described for
looking up
legislation and describing
how it would fit in with certain scenarios
Are you suggesting that
that should be provided centrally
rather than somebody creating their own agent
to interrogate the legislation?
I think that should be a part
of the website where everyone can
publicly go view the bill
so that people who
or business owners who are not relying on software
would be able to go in and describe their situation
and
find the correct relevant
information on the bill automatically
but I think the real powerful
thing about that is what I described
as you get those queries
you get to understand
where people are becoming confused
and that really helps in the future
amendments to this bill
So what you mean is
that it should be
paid for publicly rather than
somebody having their own AI license
and
agent that they
build themselves
Question from
Tiano Tuyono
Thank you very much for your presentation
Earlier you were saying that
that these global
software companies sometimes
are not aware
or have not developed their software
with the very specific conditions that we have here in New Zealand
and that could cause issues
Do you have some
specific examples of those
issues?
I don't want to name names
because obviously
it's a bad look for businesses
but many
of our clients
come off global
systems onto our system
and are surprised when we have
different rules about
how otherwise working days are
currently defined and the difference
between
the old system
to the way
our system works which is compliant
with New Zealand law, the old bill
and so because
I see that difference all the time
I know that
a lot of global
competitors are not compliant
Thank you and we actually do have time
to have a very, very quick question
from Jan Thiti
Thank you and I just
really want to make certain that
I've had experience in the past
having lived through a novopee
and that still creates issues
for me. Are you saying that
these flashbacks
Flashbacks
Wait for your flashback
Are you saying with the consideration
given now, if we consider this
now that we could alleviate
any possibility of something like that
happening in the future
Are you talking about
the conformance test suite?
Yeah
So I think it would become
I think this 24 month
period or time frame
if you could build out a suite
that would allow us to essentially
make sure and test
that every scenario
is covered and the software is working
automatically
it will make a large majority
of the businesses in New Zealand
compliant automatically because
they're using software
and it will kind of wean out
the software
systems that are not compliant in New Zealand
and then you could essentially
say to business owners
hey, these are the compliant
software if you're using these
uncompliant software just so you know
you're being uncompliant
I think the issue is that
business owners are assuming
that their software is compliant with the
New Zealand law and in a lot of cases
it is not
Thank you very much Guy
I really appreciate your
scenario thinking in this process
it's really helpful for us
Thank you
We'll move on now to Vusa, we have Aidan
and Lewis in the room
welcome come up to the table
we've got 10 minutes with you
and we'll hand it over
to you now
Thank you very much
to the chair
and members of this committee
and we thank the select committee
for allowing us the opportunity to present
on the Employment Lead Bill
we are representing Te Aka Taueta
Victoria University of Wellington
Students Association
as Vusa we represent all Taueta
from our University
half of over 20,000 students
the vast majority of which
are part-time workers and will be affected
by the proposed bill
my name is Lewis Collins I am the
Campaigns Officer for Vusa and I'm also
joined here by Aidan Donahue
the President of Vusa
so Vusa opposes
this bill in its current form
fundamentally because it shifts the risk
from employers on to workers
particularly with those with
insecure and low-hour jobs
student workers will feel these changes
sharply and early
we know that students are
already dealing with high rent
food costs, transport costs
and a difficult labour market
more often than not our student
food bank is empty by the
end of the week
so many of our Taueta rely on part-time
and casual work simply to stay enrolled
and keep going
when lead protections are weakened the impact
is immediate there is less income
there is less security
less ability to recover when sick and more
pressure to choose work over well-being
we understand the need for clarity
and reform in this space
but we do not believe that this should come
with a deduction and leave
entitlements
so our main concerns
student workers who take more time off
due to illness and burnout will lose
income
between us alone we have a combined experience
of nearly a decade in hospitality
students already worked when they were sick
because hours were hard to come by
we are only two examples but we echo
the wider experience of our students
this bill will create
an incentive for students to keep working
and not take their required sick leave
the COVID pandemic showed us the importance
of staying home and recovering
but staying home will become more
and more irrational for students
this will also have
consequences for businesses
particularly small businesses that already
have a safe base staffing pressures
and limited capacity to absorb
absences
when workers are unable to take proper leave
or feel pressured to work while unwell
illness can spread through workplaces
and deepen existing shortages
one of our students has told us they are already
stretched by university demands
alongside paid work
and they are regularly called in to cover
extra shifts and have been left managing
an entire reception area alone
because the rest of the team was sick
so situations like this are not sustainable
for workers or employers
this is just one example of many
so burnout
higher staff turnover
reduced service quality and greater training costs
for businesses already operating
on tight margins won't be good for anyone
and this is not sustainable
another point is that our students
are leaving the country in record numbers
many of our graduates are leaving New Zealand
because good working opportunities
simply do not exist
students will compare New Zealand wages
and conditions with countries like Australia
and the United Kingdom
so weaker early career conditions will accelerate
this graduate flow
according to Treasury Secretary Ian Rennie
he stated that an estimated 20-40%
of New Zealand graduates were migrating
overseas
so a significant share of our qualified young
people are leaving during their prime
working and earning years taking their
skills, tax contributions
innovation and future leadership
in the long-term consequences of this
will include a reduced skilled
workforce, weaker productivity growth
and greater pressure on key sectors
already facing shortages
and this will mean fewer
graduates investing in the future of Aotearoa
New Zealand
so we can see the value in being able to go
home early and take specific hours of sick leave
to cover the remainder of a shift
however we strongly recommend parity of leave
entitlements with full-time work
and for alternative holidays to be accrued
on a full-day basis
we also want to emphasise the need
of a strong definition of standard hours
in the bill, we're deeply concerned that this
can take the form on following
agreed minimum hours rather than
the usual or average hours worked in a week
minimising leave entitlements for workers
with flexible rostering
and finally we want to see protection
against breaches to the spirit of the law
especially the proposed changes
to entitlements to holiday pay
the requirement that 50%
or more of the same day
of the week as the public holiday had been worked
in the preceding 13 weeks
are this threshold as far too easy to circumvent
and workplaces that have flexible hours
or days of work such as
in retail or hospitality
again we understand the need for clarity
for employers however this
threshold will have the effect of incentivising
unneeded roster rotation
to avoid the increased liability
of holiday entitlements
the Employment Lead Bill
will make it harder for workers to rest
recover and stay financially afloat
students do not need
more precarity dressed up as efficiency
and ultimately
this will impact our disadvantaged students
the most, our Māori students
our Pacifica students and our disabled
toera women make up
the majority of our university and they too
will also be impacted
so we urge that either this bill
does not go ahead or amendments
are made to this bill that target administrative
simplicity, protect low-out workers
and preserve genuine access
to leave
mā kū te rau rau, no te rau rau ka ora ai te iwi
with my food basket
and your food basket that people will thrive
forever. A fair labour
market should allow students to work
and study and not force them to choose between
the two. Nā mihi nui ki ā koutou.
Thank you very much
we have a question from
Jan Taneti first. Thank you
thank you Lewis and thanks Aidan
for coming in. Really good submission
thank you because
we've heard from other sectors
and I want to ask a question
about the standard hours and we've heard from other
sectors where that's
an impact on them. Can you
talk through what
the majority of students' work
would look like in a
way. Is it that they have a small
number of hours and then
flexible hours on top of that
that you talked about one person
what does that look like for the majority
would you think? The majority
of students what we see is they'll have
an agreed set of minimum hours that
they will be guaranteed to receive in
a week so we're looking at
fast food places say McDonald's is the
usual current contract format however
what that really means in practice is say you might
have six hours agreed minimum but
throughout the majority of the time you'd be working
up to 10 to 20 just wherever you're rusted
we're concerned as we mentioned
that if we just go by the agreed minimum
hours that that's considered your standard hours
we just want to make sure that it reflects
fairly what you actually are doing
per week. So this could have as it's written
at the moment this could have a
a huge impact on annual leave
in title months for students
if it's only based on
what your agreed minimum hours is
if you're only getting a cruel leave from
your minimum but you are actually
working so much more than that
it would be unfair and you'd be
losing out on a fair bit of leave. Thank you
and a question from Tiana
to Eonal. Thank you very much
and thank you for your very strong
submission and I agree
with what you're saying as well
just to follow up around
your comments that you made around
clarity and simplicity we did have a couple
of software people show up
as well and I was
wondering around
that clarity and
simplicity part
what would your suggestion
be to this committee
to ensure that we do get that
clarity but
we still are able to
retain the leave entitlements
that you've been talking about.
Well it comes to the idea of
universalism where if the leave entitlements
are the same across the board that's less of an
explanation between that you have to make
to either young workers or new workers and
employers as to what each
different contracted
different type of agreement is worth
and we personally do a lot of work
within our students to
identify
what entitlements they have already by putting
in different entitlements depending on your work leave
that only opens up the risk of
misunderstanding or
abuse from employers relying
on not knowing what your entitlements are.
Wonderful thank you very much really
appreciate you being here to be part of this
process with us and as I've said
to those that have come and joined us in the room it's nice
to be part of this.
Thank you very much
for coming on down.
Thank you very much.
With that
we move on now to the midwifery
employee representation
advisory services who are online
we have David Munro.
Welcome David.
Thank you for joining us.
We have 10 minutes with you this morning
that includes time for questions.
We'll hand it over to you now.
Thank you to the committee
for the opportunity
to submit.
You've got our written submission
I realised in preparing for this I think
I'll probably start at the bottom
and go back to the top.
We're going to start with the
questions and then
we'll go to the bottom and go back to the top.
I noted at the end
that the small number of things
about the spill that we support could easily
be enacted as part of an amendment
to the holidays act
and having listened to a lot of the submissions
today I think that could be a much
simpler way to tackle
what have been identified as the problems.
We do however
start with a congratulation
I haven't actually heard it mentioned today
but the attending
is going to the unintended
consequence in the current legislation
whereby
women in particular come back
from parental leave to
leave that they may be able to take
but which has no value
is along
due improvement
and it should have been done as an amendment
to the Holidays Act.
I should mention that
Mary Asses Midwives Union
99% of our members are women
and mothers
and it's a standard piece of advice
that we under the current legislation
give to people is use up
your annual leave before you go on parental leave
because it may not have
any value to you when you come back
which is completely counterintuitive to the fact
that when you come back from parental leave
you may indeed then want
to have some paid leave
for rest and recreation
which has been pointed out
in a number of the submissions
but also just to attend
to all the new burdens
of parenthood.
So
a piece of good news there
most of our members
were 0.6
or 0.8 and
varies so
where we may not be having to give advice
about taking your annual leave
I can see that the transition period
which later on we've suggested
should be three years
but the education sector gets
health is pretty complicated too
and
how that all shakes down
would be something
that would take time
other submitters
have talked about promoting the casualization
frankly
permanent part-time
work is a real feature
of a lot of work in the health sector
and the fact that
those rosters move around
I've been interested in the comments about
the additional hours that would
create the leave compensation payment
versus the permanent ones
the incentives
are difficult to completely assess at this stage
because
we know from a number of our members
that some of them want more
permanent shifts and currently do casual
shifts and there would be
a drive to get that so that you're accumulating
leave on those
for others the preference is
that to be genuinely casual
you ring up, no, don't have to come
and
the leave compensation payment
would be
an improvement on
the current 8%
the otherwise working day
and I've been working
with the Holidays Act for many years
including for unions
and as a consultant and
trying to work that out has
already been the subject of a huge amount
of work, Bournemouth
was referring to it as well
I think the
7 out of 13 is too onerous
in
health sector there are a number of
formulas written into collective agreements
5 out of 13
is not uncommon
when I worked as
a consultant in the
fast food industry
we had a collective agreement where 2 out of
3 wound up
being the proportion
that was
deemed to be fair so we
proposed that it should be
4 out of 13 in the previous
13 weeks
and the other
thing about that too was
up averse incentives
because
people will think I need to get up to the 5
in the 13 weeks and you
don't really want people making decisions
about taking an extra shift
when it may not be in their interests
or the interests of the employer
simply to meet a threshold
which is more onerous than the one that
generally applies in health at the moment
made
comment
about the transition arrangements
bereavement leave
I'm not sure that
it's not an opportunity to actually
target some of the things that
are insufficient of leave in the current act
in collective agreements
and in the health sector in particular
the
leave available
when the circle of life goes wrong
when it can be a partner or a child
who dies
is often more than the 3 days
and it would be a strange situation
where that happens to somebody and they only take
3 days
and in terms of the other submitters
I've always been a hawk about the fact that
I
I detest the practice
of employers who just
automatically say do you want to take some annual leave
and you've run out of sick leave
do you want to take some annual leave
because I very much support the views that annual leave
is for rest and recreation
and if you're on bereavement leave it's not rest and recreation
if you're on sick leave it's not rest and recreation
and that's a very strong argument I think
for improved bereavement leave
we've got collective agreements
where it includes
pet parents
we've suggested here
spouse partner
because as I say that there's
an extra layer of trauma
and tragedy in that situation
because we can all expect to go to our grandparents
funeral we don't expect
to go to our children's funerals
we
we didn't comment about
the
the sick leave
accumulation and the impact
that will have on a lot of our members
and we
would further submit about an underpinning
mechanisms. I heard earlier
the theoretical example of the person
who can take 10 Mondays off
and frankly that
works union members as well
you're a full time worker
you can only take 2 weeks off with your 10 day sick leave
you've got a colleague who's chosen
to only work one day they get 10
but having mentioned that we
predominantly 0.6, 0.8
membership
that some sort of underpinning in there
of at least
24 hours
applying regardless
of how few the hours might be
should be something to consider
but
that's probably all I want to say
the bottle is in the submission and we support
the CTO submission in terms of the
problems and I've made a comment there
there is a lot of drafting work
that needs to be done there are parts
that you read and you
sort of struggle to identify
the meaning but I presume
in all good pieces of legislation
we're at the beginning of the process and the improvements
will flow
but the final point I think
is that it would be a hell of a lot easier to
just do the necessary amendments
to the current legislation.
Thank you very much David we do appreciate
your participation in the process and
your submission that you've given us
today.
Thank you.
Any questions?
Yeah there is always
time for questions there's not always
questions but Keanu we do have
a question from Keanu.
Thank you very much for your comprehensive submission
we heard earlier from
the software people that said
they could sort this all out
in two years
but you're suggesting three years
could you
explain to the committee why you think we should
have that extra year in terms of
potential transitional arrangements?
Yeah it's partly
in the health sector and I don't know
if this has been mentioned before and it is
another interesting consideration
about the holidays legislation
because although
it's there for rest and recreation
it's not necessarily always easy
to take and there are huge
leave balances I
caught the tail end of Steve Haring's
submission earlier
I know that amongst
some of the senior members in the health sector
you can have leave balances that
wind up at half a year
and
they don't get taken for rest and recreation
they wind up being paid out when people
change jobs
or retire
so it's partly those huge leave
balances being there and it's
the technicalities of the
software companies I don't think are as important
as the relationships
it's a major change to the way
the legislation will work and that changes
the relationships between employers
and employees
and there's going to be quite a period of time
to settle in as I say that pattern
between works hours that
attract leave compensation payment
versus hours that are attracting leave
and the way people want
to sort that out the impact
that has on rosters it's not just about the leave
that you accumulate or the pay
that's a really nice work in the workplace
and our assessment is that
there's going to be quite a period of
shakedown needed
Thank you David
Thank you very much David
committee just before we move on
we have a member
Phil Triford that wants to acknowledge some guests
before they leave
Thanks Chair
colleagues this is a delegation with us
who are from
Cambodia and Laos
program it's like a fellowship program
for six months funded through
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
We're waiting for you to be clear
Thank you very much
for observing our
submitting
I all want to be in peace
Right
we will move
on now to the young workers
resource centre
we have online Matariki
Roche
Welcome Matariki
Thank you so much for being with us today
we've got ten minutes with you
so we'll hand over it to you now
Hi Matariki
I'm Matariki
I'm the comms
and engagement coordinator
at Young Workers Resource Centre
we also hosted
the wonderful delegation
of young leaders from Cambodia
and Laos so big shout out to them as well
for coming along today
First I just wanted to thank you all
for your time and I'm going to take
our submission as read
I've got a couple of other points
that I wanted to make just to build off
our read submission
Firstly I just kind of wanted to
paint a picture for you actually
about the reality of being a young worker
at the moment
Young workers are more likely to be in part-time
casual or regular work
we're more likely to be
working additional hours
often we feel that we cannot refuse
those additional hours for fear
of missing out on future shifts
or for the need to catch up
to our more experienced co-workers
we have a vulnerability
to getting sick
there are often environmental factors
like shitty
crowded housing
that means that we're more vulnerable
to getting sick
we have less negotiating power
when it comes to negotiating
our individual employment agreements
we're more likely to be
in low paid work
we face the
financial insecurity
and the instability of things like
youth rates, training wage
and 90 day trials
and along with that we're in a time of our lives
where we
the impact
and the financial burden
of unexpected service
circumstances hit us harder
and it's harder to absorb that
so with that in mind
we've deeply, deeply
opposed the changes
to the Holidays Act through this proposed
employment leave bill
we think that the
proposed bill will
exacerbate those inequalities that young
workers already face that I just mentioned
and we know that young workers will be
missing out on leave
particularly sick and you'll leave
through those additional hours that they work
we also know that
they're going to have a harder time
negotiating the bear minimum
more than the bear minimum because of these changes
moving from a days
or weeks system
to an hourly accrual
makes it really hard as a young
worker to negotiate that you know
it's much easier to say
hey can I have
one more day of sick leave added to my
contract rather than being like hey
can we change the negotiation from
0.385 to whatever it might be
so we also know that
not only are the minimums
going to be reduced but also the possibility
of getting more will also be
reduced
we mentioned in our written submission
that young workers are
often misclassified
as casual workers when the reality
is that they are part-timers
and we're also really concerned
about the
pathway forward for those
misclassified workers
because of this bill
we often tell workers
the young workers that come to us
about the benefits of arguing
for a
permanent contract even if they're on low
hours
and they have to balance
the benefits of that with the immense amount
of fear and the very real
possibility that they might lose their job
or not be offered future shifts
they raise that issue
and now with the leave compensation
payment what we will say is that
those extra hours that
we often say to employers
hey just put them on
a five hour a week contract even if
they're more likely to be doing 10 or 15
if you put them on a permanent contract
you can make those hours lower
and in the current system their leave
annual and sick leave will still accrue on that
however in the proposed
system that will no longer
happen and so those benefits
of going for that more permanent
and secure working agreement
is also lower because of this
we also just
frankly believe that
that no entitlements
no leave entitlements should be reduced
because of any proposed bill
we should be improving
things as we go along making
our working lives better for the generations
coming up beneath us
but this bill does not do
that
and we will say that in fact
leave and general rights of workers
particularly young workers will be eroded
because of this
young workers also
have not been in the position to be able
to contribute or have a say
in or shape the employment system
that we currently exist in we face
all of these inequalities that makes
it harder for us to
have thriving lives that include
work but we have not been able
to have the
contribution to shape
the system that we're in whether that's because
of you know the fact that the system
changed so drastically before we were born
or even just thinking about the workers
that have come into the workforce since the last election
but in saying that
that means that you the committee
actually had the real opportunity
to think of young workers and keep us in
mind when shaping
what our employment system
looks like
just because we haven't had a say doesn't mean
that we don't have the option to create
something new
and lastly with that I would just like
to request that the committee
supports the pledge proposed
by the PSA
that no
entitlements or leave balances
are reduced as a result of this
bill
we also support the recommendations and the submission
made by the CTU as well
as PSA youth. Thank you
Thank you very much
we have our first question from Carl Bates
Thanks very much chair
thank you for your submission
I'm always a bit skeptical when
submitters submit on a
bill and are essentially of the view that
it should entirely be got rid of
so I just want to understand from
you if you
understand that your young workers
also include
pregnant young woman
yeah and if you read our submission
you would see the points that we supported
of this bill
so I'm just making sure in your
verbal submission you're reflecting that
you're not entirely against
this bill and this bill does improve
the outcomes
for some workers
not blatant
you know get rid of the whole thing
again
if you read our submission
you would have seen the points that we did
support such as pace lips being mandatory
leaving
available from day one
however we
as we said in our submission we hold the position that
you know improving
some parts of our employment system
should not come at the cost
of reducing leave
or reducing those rights for other workers
it doesn't have to be
this gives some take some we should be increasing
to benefit for all
No I appreciate that I'm just making sure it comes from the corridor
live as well
and the third part of that is doesn't this actually
mean for young
casual workers
that they will receive
their allowance at the
12.5%
essentially meaning that they would be better
off than if they just
got sickly when they actually
needed it during
their casual work
Yes and no
the majority of the young
workers on casual agreements that we come
through one have been
in the casual role with regular hours
for more than six months so they do have
entitlement to sick leave
and while we
differently support
the recognition of the
peculiarity of casual work that the LCP reflects
we also know that it does
put
those who are misclassified
particularly misclassified by actually
all casual workers in a
precarious issue where
if you don't have
that money that you received from the LCP
in your last
pay cycle doesn't actually
mean a whole heap when you are sick
in the current week and you need
to take leave but you then
don't have sick leave to take and can't
pay your bills that
week so while
there is some benefit for
that there is also
there is still a cost and we are still
going to see workers either taking
unpaid sick leave or
more likely I assume
coming to work second and
spreading the illness around
So just to be
clear rather than trusting that people
can manage their own
money and
end up with more in the pocket because they
receive this entitlement
regardless of whether they take sick leave
at all during the period your view is
let's not give that to everyone
and let's
have a system that says
only those that use
their sick leave are the ones that
get it
I'm not sure if that's exactly what I'm
saying I do think there should be
some recognition for the precarious
nature of casual work
but I also think all workers should have
the protection of sick leave
it's a protection
that benefits us all
and it's a safety net that catches us
which is particularly important
when young workers are in precarious
and vulnerable situations
that already have a weakened safety
net.
Thank you and a question from Tiana
Tiana.
My
questions around
you gave an example
where
workers will
end up having to calculate
actually what their leave entitlement will
and
for me that sounded like that would provide
less clarity and so I wanted
to just check in with you to make sure
that was the point that you were making
because the point of this whole exercise is to make things
clearer and that will make it less clearer
for workers and then I've got a follow-up
question from Matt.
Kia ora and Tiana.
Yeah 100%
essentially it's going to make things
clearer for workers.
I've also had conversations
supported by solidarity members here at YWRC
and a few of those are employers
a couple of them have reached out to me
because they've said oh you know
we've heard about how this is going to impact
young workers and we want to give our workers
our employees more than the minimum
can we just give them you know
extra 5, 10 days
yada yada yada will maintain the 10 days
and I was like
yeah except you're still
going to have to do that conversion
and that was really unclear to them
and these employers as well as these
young workers
yeah there was a lot of
confusion
harder to find a pathway forward it's less clear
in short.
My follow-up question is the comment
she made around about around how
people are up there told the casual workers
but actually they're part-time workers
I wonder if you could give some
concrete specific examples that would
be very clear for the committee
Kia ora, yeah for sure
so
we had
an ice cream worker at one of our workshops
a couple of weeks ago and this young worker
had been working at this
ice cream shop for I think
it was nearly two and a half years
they worked consistently
every Saturday
you know frequent
and those hours would increase during the summer times
as you can imagine
they've been working regularly at least every Saturday
for over two years
they were on a casual agreement
when we described the working
patterns like in our workshops
we go through and we talk about employment types
and when we explain what a
part-time permanent employee looks
like in comparison to a casual worker
this young worker had this like
penny drop moment of whole
shoot I'm supposed to be a part-time worker
they were really really scared
when they learnt that they actually
the reality of that means that their boss
can just stop offering them shifts
and that stability that they've gained over the past
two years that reliance on this income
would just instantly drop
sorry
I must
stop you there because we've got to move on
to our next submitter
we've gone over time with you but really appreciate
your contribution to the process
and you're making yourself available for us today
so thank you
Kia ora
we move on now to business south
who we have online
we have Shona Brown, Katarina Slade
and Wilford Paul
good afternoon
members of the committee and chair
I'm Shona Brown, advocacy advisor
at business south
and we
are part of the Otago Chamber of Commerce
and
the shareholder of business New Zealand
representing
around 1400 businesses
across Otago and Southland
the Holidays Act has been
a genuine pain point for our members
for years with payroll
examples like payroll errors
costly remediation
and real uncertainty about whether
they're getting it right
so we would like this reform
to succeed and support
the direction of the bill
I'm sitting here not as a technical
expert
our role is to bring the lived
experience of businesses on the ground
and our submission is built directly
from member consultation
we were fortunate
to have Minister Van Velden join
a members only webinar
only recently to walk through the bill
and take questions
which is directly shaped what we've raised
in our submission
so rather than speak to the content in our submission
I've brought along
a member
I've got Katarina Slade and Wilford Paul
from PurePack
they're based in Cromwell and Central Otago
they're exactly the kind of business
this bill needs to work for
they have a seasonal workforce with
variable hours
and weather dependent operations
they can speak to both what's working in the bill
and where the practical problems
sit and possible solutions
I'd encourage the committee to direct
any detailed questions to both of them
as they're far better placed
than I am to bring those issues to life
so thank you to the
committee for your time and I'll hand over to
Katarina
Thank you Sharma
I'd like to introduce ourselves a little bit further
we're a cherry growing
and pack house business in Cromwell
our harvest season runs
specifically from around
well not quite specifically
from the middle of December
and that can shift around within a two week period
due to the high uncertainty of it
the harvest period runs for about
six weeks sometimes seven
we at peak
employ 250 to 300
people to work
both on the picking and harvest side
and in our packing operation
many of our employees
are backpackers
on working holiday visas
we've also got a reasonably good cohort
of returning semi-retired
employees and a few
local school kids
we support the bills
direction overall
and there are a lot of
great components to it that we definitely agree with
our verbal submission will
pull out the parts that are concerning
to us or that we think
could be tweaked to work more appropriately
for seasonal employment
the first
kind of area of concern
I guess is around the LCP
and sick leave
obviously if you're a reverse engineer
it's based on a 10 day entitlement
or the equivalent thereof
firstly that increases
the cost to employers
to the full 10 day entitlement
which is more than what most
permanent employees would
cost because many of them
don't actually take their full entitlement
it's there if they need it and so it should be
but it makes it
slightly weighted towards the casual
secondly and probably most importantly
is a food handling organisation where we are processing
cherries and there are 70 people
coming
into contact with the food
granted there is a lot of PPE involved
we
strongly prefer
that sick leave is actually used for genuine
illness to prevent people
coming to work when they're sick
and coming into contact with cherries that are then going
out into the world for consumption
so
paying out and cash that sick leave
removes the incentive
for an employee to call in sick
on the day when they're generally sick
they may feel able to do work but we still
don't want them contaminating the product
so that's why we're against
cashing out any kind of sick leave
and would prefer it's used
bereavement leave
is another one that we're a little bit
worried about the potential for misuse
so
oh actually sorry I've skipped ahead
yes we'll talk about the uncertainty factor
in the LCP
so there's a bit of rounding
or uncertainty factor woven into that
which would just like
to raise that as an employer
we equally experience
that uncertainty factor we can offer someone
when they're on a truly casual
contract we offer them a shift and they don't
have to accept it
so that uncertainty is experienced
both by the employee because they don't know
if they're going to get off at a shift
and by the employer who doesn't know if the employee
is going to accept the shift and we have to
build that variability into our business
as well so we don't support
there being extra compensation
for that
bereavement leave
particularly in a short employment period
there
is not that built up trust
as there is with a longer term employment arrangement
and it is open
to misuse if
an employee two days into their contract
they just need to be some kind of
ability to make
a reasonable request to check the evidence
so that the integrity of the leave's purpose
is protected
I guess the largest concern for us
is the
assessment of an otherwise working day
and we really appreciate
the attempt to increase
the
clarity around that
that is definitely needed
the current
legislation
and interpretation is a real significant
source of friction in our
workplace and I think
in a lot of seasonal businesses
so definitely can acknowledge and agree
that clarity is needed
where the concern comes
from is when we employ
someone in the middle of December right when our
harvest period starts for six week
seven-week contract
in that period there is a
disproportionate number of
public holidays
or that fall
and under the proposed assessment
of looking at
up to 13 weeks history
but less if less exists
you could end up in a situation
where someone has only worked two days
in that period
and they decline every other shift that we offer them
and they are entitled
to then four days of
paying public
holiday leave so
yes it would be very clear
on what the entitlement is
but in practicality
it's
waited too far equally on the other foot
the opposite could happen someone could work
every other day except that Friday
and Saturday beforehand
and not be entitled to a single public holiday
but they actually worked more
than someone who might be
so
it's a tricky I can see
it's really tricky
a potential suggestion which we have come up
on how to
tackle this issue
is in the situation
where a worker has a really short
work history but or
less than 13 weeks
is to assume that
over a 12-month period if they are doing casual
work
but they perhaps qualified
for half of all the public holidays
and include that
in the LCP and have no other
holiday entitlements
that way it's
clear what the entitlements are
you don't get it you get an extra piece of payment
for the fact that
to compensate you for not being
able to take the public holidays
and it waits
it across
the workforce at every time of the year
it's not disproportionately hitting businesses
that like ours which are forced
to harvest our crop during that summer period
I believe that's
Wilfred did I miss anything
yeah we just want the burden of cost
to be fair
more equally spread
and to remove
in that short term
where a really short
work period exists
to make
it more equitable
in a way that keeps the clarity
that the bill aims for
that's all I've got for you
right thank you so much
I just want to say really appreciate the constructive
and helpful submission that you provided us
just the detail
and you know live examples
are really helpful for us to work through
so thank you for that
and we'll move on now
to our final submitter for today
which is
Unite Union
Manitopu and that is Tali Williams
with us online
we'll move on
thank you
Welcome
we have 10 minutes with you
that includes time for question
and we will leave it to you now
Kia ora koutou
I'm the Assistant National Secretary
of Unite Union
Represents
Unite Union represents 5,500 members in fast food, hospitality, entertainment, hotels,
cinemas and the call centre industries. We are opposing the Employment Leave Bill that
would slash the pay and leave entitlements of tens of thousands of working people,
mainly lower paid working people who are already struggling through the cost of living and the
fuel crisis. Under this bill, the work completed outside of contracted hours
would no longer accrue sick leave or annual leave, a change that would disproportionately
affect park time and casual workers. These workers are our members in low paid industries.
And further, these workers are already in percurious employment situations. These changes will only
make life worse for them. We don't accept that the bill is about simplifying complex law.
The findings and recommendations of the Holidays Act Task Force, which was in place
to address complexities and reduce complexities has been largely ignored.
The exploring of the hours based accrual system was discontinued by the task force
part way through when they realised it financially disadvantaged a substantial
number of workers compared to the current act. That seems to be no concern to the current
government. As an example of affected industries, a substantive number of workers in fast food
have a set amount of guaranteed hours. And then hours beyond that are considered additional
hours to find a proposed bill. So over a sample of a 13 week period in 2025,
to give an example, a third of hours worked over that period were not guaranteed under one May
fast food brand that we cover. A worker within this fast food brand worked an average of 36 hours
a week. However, only five of those hours were guaranteed with the others being classed as
additional hours. That means under the new bill, this worker would only accrue leave based on her
five guaranteed hours, which would be 0.38 of an hour per week accrued. This is unfair and untenable.
To get one week's leave, this worker would have to work for two years.
This for a worker who averages 36 hours and contributes to our economy pays her taxes and so on.
The proposed 12% in lieu of a leave only confirms lack of understanding of the hand-to-mouth nature
of those working in precarious and low paid employment. One in such a position cannot afford to put money
aside to allow for leave to be taken at a later date. People will invariably need and use the
money now, particularly in a cost of living crisis. If you don't have savings because you're trying
to cover weekly costs, you are punished again with not being able to afford to take the leave.
Then, of course, there's the reduction to sick leave. The same group of fast food workers that
I referred to earlier under this bill would accrue sick leave for only two-thirds of the work that
they do. Of course, the major issue with less sick leave for these workers is that they will
come to work sick because they can't afford to take unpaid leave. This means passing on illness
resulting in more sickness not only on site with their fellow workers, but the broader community
because these people work with food and prepare and serve food. As we all know and have experienced,
people are getting sick longer and more seriously these days with viruses such as COVID, RSV and
so on. We know that under this bill, employers seeing what seems on the face of it to be a financial
advantage will seek to offer the less amount of guaranteed hours and then simply top up
hours as they wish. This means the less they will have to afford fair annual and sick leave.
This risk of increased casualization will have a compounding negative effect on the community.
Of course, the more precarious the work, the worse off the workers' lives,
but also the less resources people have to put back into the economy.
Precarious work also results in more exploitation and risk exploitation as people clamber for the
dregs of hours their employer makes available and those workers feel compromised to raise
various workplace concerns and even fear of raising serious health and safety risks.
These are people already struggling on low wages and low hours during the cost of living crisis.
It is shameful that the government is not only refusing to help those most of them need,
but actively seeking to legislate to make life tougher for them. Working people
deserve holidays and time with their families and they deserve to take the time off they need
when they're sick and when their children are sick. Unite Union strongly opposes the attack
on leave entitlements of the most vulnerable workers. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Tali, we have our first question from Jan Tineety.
Kia ora, Tali, and thank you very much for your submission this morning or this afternoon.
And can I also say thank you for your example that you gave your case study that you titled the SS.
I felt that was really, really helpful. When I was going through and we were determining
Labour's position on this bill, our key rationale was that nobody would be worse off at the end
than at the beginning. And obviously that's not the case. And when I first started,
I was told it's only a few workers. But I'm getting the sense that we're talking about a lot of workers
here. You say you represent five and a half thousand workers. How many of them would be
in this situation or roughly how many of them would be in this situation if having guaranteed
hours but then having to work way more hours on the on the roster? I would say about half
conservatively. Yeah, so it's quite a big amount that we're talking about. And the question that I
asked the Law Society before, is there a fear that the way that this is written at the moment
incentivises that to happen more? Yes, absolutely. That is our fear.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you. And question now from Tiana Tuoyono.
Kia ora, Tali. Thank you very much for your very clear, clear submission and with a lot of
really useful detail in there. I wanted to come back to your point around the
hours of cruel system. And you were referencing, I think, the task force in 2018. I wasn't anywhere
near Parliament then. I wonder if you could maybe tell us a bit more about the problems
with that approach, why it was abandoned and what that impact of that will be on your members.
Can I just, before you do that, Tali, just let you know you've got one minute left in your
submission. So if we could make that brief. Okay. Well, in summary, I don't have a whole lot to say
on that other than my understanding is that the findings of the task force without that hours
based on cruel system wouldn't work. That it wasn't appropriate for all forms of work,
particularly those part timers and casuals. And therefore that was abandoned. I don't
have any more to say on that. Thank you. I really appreciate your participation in this process
and you making the time to come and join us for our hearings today, Tali. Thank you again.
And we'll now move into private session with our officials. Thank you.